feat: add the ability to emit custom events in unit tests (#1589)
canonical/operator: docs/howto/manage-libraries.md

(manage-libraries)=
# Manage libraries

> See first: {external+charmcraft:ref}`Charmcraft | Manage libraries <manage-libraries>`

## Use a library

> In your `src/charm.py`, observe the custom events it puts at your disposal. For example, a database library may have provided a  `ready` event -- a high-level wrapper around the relevant `juju` relation events -- so you use it to manage the database relation in your charm:

Reviewer: I'd suggest a few adjustments, mainly to make it clearer what "it" refers to:

```suggestion
In `src/charm.py`, observe the custom events that the library provides. For example, a database library may have provided a  `ready` event -- a high-level wrapper around the relevant `juju` relation events. You can use the `ready` event to manage the database relation in your charm:
```

```python
import ops
from charms.charm_with_lib.v0.database_lib import DatabaseReadyEvent, DatabaseRequirer

class MyCharm(ops.CharmBase):
    def __init__(self, framework: ops.Framework):
        super().__init__(framework)
        self.database = DatabaseRequirer(self, 'db-relation')
        framework.observe(self.database.on.ready, self._on_db_ready)

    def _on_db_ready(self, event: DatabaseReadyEvent):
        secret_content = event.credential_secret.get_content()
        ...
```

> The tests for the charm that uses this library look like:

Reviewer: Minor suggestion, since "this" could be misinterpreted as referring to the charm what we just showed.

```suggestion
The tests for the charm that uses the database library look like:
```

Author: ```suggestion
A unit test for the charm that uses the database library looks like:
```

```python
from ops import testing
from charms.charm_with_lib.v0.database_lib import DatabaseRequirer

def test_ready_event():
    ctx = testing.Context(MyCharm)
    secret = testing.Secret({'username': 'admin', 'password': 'admin'})
    state_in = testing.State(secrets={secret})

    state_out = ctx.run(ctx.on.custom(DatabaseRequirer, credential_secret=secret), state_in)

    assert ...
```

## Write a library

> When you're writing libraries, instead of callbacks, use custom events; this results in a more `ops`-native-feeling API. A custom event is, from a technical standpoint, an [](ops.EventBase) subclass that can be emitted at any point throughout the charm's lifecycle. These events are totally unknown to Juju. They are essentially charm-internal, and can be useful to abstract certain conditional workflows and wrap the top level Juju event so it can be observed independently.

Reviewer: This paragraph really helped me get the point of how a library works. Nice :smile: 

A couple of nit suggestions:
```suggestion
When you're writing libraries, instead of callbacks, use custom events. This results in a more Ops-native feeling API. From a technical standpoint, a custom event is an [](ops.EventBase) subclass that can be emitted to Ops at any point throughout the charm's lifecycle. These events are totally unknown to Juju. They are essentially charm-internal, and can be useful to abstract certain conditional workflows and wrap the top level Juju event so it can be observed independently.
```

```{important}

> Custom events must inherit from `EventBase`, but not from an `ops` subclass of

Reviewer: I'd probably change `ops` to Ops here, for consistency.

Author: I thought that we were meant to be standardising on `ops` but happy to go with this.

```suggestion
Custom events must inherit from `EventBase`, but not from an Ops subclass of
```

        super().__init__(handle)
        self.credential_secret = credential_secret

    def snapshot(self) -> dict[str, str]:
        data = super().snapshot()
        data['credential_secret_id'] = self.credential_secret.id
        return data

    def restore(self, snapshot: dict[str, Any]):
        super().restore(snapshot)
        credential_secret_id = snapshot['credential_secret_id']
        self.credential_secret = self.framework.model.get_secret(id=credential_secret_id)

class DatabaseRequirerEvents(ops.ObjectEvents):
    """Container for Database Requirer events."""
    ready = ops.charm.EventSource(DatabaseReadyEvent)

class DatabaseRequirer(ops.Object):
    on = DatabaseRequirerEvents()

    def __init__(self, charm: ops.CharmBase, relation_name: str):
        super().__init__(charm, relation_name)
        self.framework.observe(charm.on['database'].relation_changed, self._on_db_changed)
    
    def _on_db_changed(self, event: ops.RelationChangedEvent):
        if remote_data_is_valid(event.relation):
            secret = ...
            self.on.ready.emit(credential_secret=secret)
```

## Write tests

> ### Test initialisation

Reviewer: I first thought that this would be about initialising the test framework, so how about "Test that the library initialises"?

Author: ```suggestion
### Test that the library initialises
```

> In `tests/unit/test_my_lib.py`, add an initial test that a charm can initialise

Reviewer: Small suggestion to remove "initial" and follow the pattern used later in the doc:

```suggestion
In `tests/unit/test_my_lib.py`, add a test that validates that a charm can initialise
```

```python
import pytest
import ops
from ops import testing
from lib.charms.my_Charm.v0.my_lib import DatabaseRequirer

class MyTestCharm(ops.CharmBase):
    META = {
        "name": "my-charm"
    }
    def __init__(self, framework: ops.Framework):
        super().__init__(framework)
        self.db = DatabaseRequirer(self, 'my-relation')
        
    
@pytest.mark.parametrize('event', (
    'start', 'install', 'stop', 'remove', 'update-status', #...
))
def test_charm_runs(event):
    """Verify that the charm can create the library object, and doesn't see unexpected events."""
    ctx = testing.Context(MyTestCharm, meta=MyTestCharm.META)
    state_in = testing.State()
    ctx.run(getattr(ctx.on, event), state_in)
    assert len(ctx.emitted_events) == 0
    assert isinstance(ctx.emitted_events[0], ops.StartEvent)
```

### Test custom endpoint names

If `DatabaseRequirer` is a relation endpoint wrapper, a frequent pattern is to
allow customising the name of the endpoint that the object is wrapping.

> Examples: [`traefik's ingress-per-unit`](https://github.com/canonical/traefik-k8s-operator/blob/main/lib/charms/traefik_k8s/v1/ingress_per_unit.py) lib

> In our `tests/unit/test_my_lib.py` file, add a test that validates that custom

Reviewer: our --> your for consistency with the rest of the doc:

```suggestion
In your `tests/unit/test_my_lib.py` file, add a test that validates that custom
```

def test_charm_runs(context):
    """Verify that the charm executes regardless of how we name the requirer endpoint."""
    state_in = testing.State()
    with context(context.on.start(), state_in) as mgr:
        mgr.run()
        assert mgr.charm.saw_start
```

### Test that the custom event is emitted

> To verify that the library does emit the custom event appropriately, in the
> `tests/unit/test_my_lib.py` file, add the test:

Reviewer: Recommend a small adjustment to match the rest of the doc:

```suggestion
To verify that the library does emit the custom event appropriately,
add a test in your `tests/unit/test_my_lib.py` file:
```
